## Alcohol Data Analysis:

This Sample is a group final project for Math 50: Intro to Linear Models. It was a statistical analysis performed on a dataset of alcohol consumption data collected from Spanish youth. 

### Data Cleaning and Collinearity Analysis:
We generated a new response variable T_alc which represents a nominal rating scale of total alcohol consumed both during the week and weekend. It was constructed by adding the weekend and weekday alcohol consumption as reported by students. We also changed all binary variables to be represented using 0 and 1, in order to make our regressions possible. This included predictors such as sex, family size (less than or equal to 3, or greater than 3), and parental cohabitation status.
Next, we generated a linear model that included all of the relevant predictors contained in the data set, ensuring that we created dummy variables for categorical predictors such as mother’s job and travel time. Although this model was found through cross-validation to not be overfit, we wanted to extract the most meaningful predictors to create a simpler regression model that would more effectively demonstrate correlations between predictors and alcohol consumption. From the results of this linear model we extracted the predictors that were found to be statistically significant. That is, they had a coefficient with a p-value less than our predetermined alpha level of 0.05. The p-value represents the probability that we would see such a coefficient given that there is no relationship between the predictor and alcohol consumption, so a low p-value indicates that there is likely a true correlation between the predictor and alcohol consumption. These were sex, family size, paid (whether they pay for extra classes), nursery (whether they attended nursery school), famrel (family relation— students rate their familial relationships from 1-5), goout (self rating from 1-5 of how often a student “goes out”), number of absences, fjob (father job), traveltime to school (rated 1-3), and studytime (how much a student studies). 
Additionally, we generated a correlation matrix using all the predictors to determine whether there were any collinear predictors. We wanted to eliminate any collinearity in the model because if two predictors are highly correlated, this results in a sloppy model in which the standard errors of the two coefficients are high because a change in a1 can be compensated for by a change in a2. We want all the predictors to be fairly independent of one another, because their coefficients will be narrowly distributed (small standard error) and thus more informative of the true relationship of a predictor and the response variable. The correlation matrix finds the Pearson’s correlation coefficient, or cov(X1,X2) / (std(X1)*std(X2)) and thus gives a standardized measure of correlation between two predictors. Mother’s job and education were correlated (correlation > 0.7), as well as the grades that the students received in the given classes, but none of these predictors were statistically significant and therefore were not ultimately used in the regression anyway. Additionally, we determined from the correlation matrix that age, class failures, and free time are also highly correlated with alcohol consumption, and therefore chose to also include these variables in the ensuing regression models.

## Conclusions

We have concluded that this simplified model with eight predictors made up of the most significant predictors was the best model we could create to analyze the relationship between students’ demographics and alcohol consumption. The predictors are sex, famsize, goout, famrel, traveltime, nursery, paid, and absences.
	The R2  value for this regression is 0.343, indicating that 34.2% of the variation in alcohol consumption can be explained by variation in the eight predictors. While this is less than the R2  value for the unsimplified version of this model that contained more predictors (0.373), and the simplified model that contained the interaction terms (0.374), these models contain significantly more predictors and therefore demonstrate less clearly the predictors that are most strongly associated with alcohol consumption. And, the interaction terms in the second model make interpretation unintuitive and even misleading. 
	So what do the variables in this regression indicate? All the predictors, aside from a traveltime dummy variable, have statistically significant p-values meaning that if there was truly no correlation between each predictor and alcohol consumption, there is an exceptionally low likelihood that we would see these correlation coefficients. Our most statistically significant predictors, all of which have a p-value of 0.000, are sex, famrel, goout, and traveltime=4. Being a male correlates with an increase of 1.1332 in alcohol consumption (rated on a scale from 1 to 9) – that is, when all other predictors in the model are held constant, going from female to male results in an average increase of 1.1332 in alcohol consumption on this scale. Shown on a histogram, female students have a stronger left-skew than male students, indicating that there are more female students who drink less total alcohol per week than male. 
Also, the variable for going out is statistically significant (and makes logical sense when relating to alcohol consumption i.e. party = alcohol). On average, an increase in 1 of going out frequency rating correlates with an average increase in rated alcohol consumption of 0.6301 when all other predictors are held constant. A goout score of 1 (very low) has a left-skewed histogram. Compared to goout score of 5 (very high) with more distribution among higher Talc values, it is clear from a visual analysis as well that there is a positive correlation between going out and alcohol consumption.  
Further, the variable famrel is also statistically significant, indicating that there is a relationship between the quality of family relationships and student alcohol consumption. Famrel is measured on a scale of 1 to 5 (1 being “very bad” and 5 being “excellent”). There is a negative relationship between famrel and student alcohol consumption (-0.3379), indicating the lower a student’s famrel score is (the worse their family relationships are) the more likely they are to have a higher alcohol consumption. An increase in 1 famrel rating corresponds with a decrease of 0.3379 in alcohol consumption rating when all other predictors are held constant. 
Additionally, traveltime_4 has a statistically significant coefficient of 2.4489, which is quite large. This indicates that when all other predictors are held constant, if a student lives over an hour away from school as opposed to less then 15 minutes away, they are rated an average of 2.4489 points higher on alcohol consumption. Although we have minimal information about the geography of the region from which this data was collected, this may be explained by a difference in the neighborhood in which the student lives. Neighborhood could be correlated with race, ethnicity, or family income, which could in turn correlate with alcohol consumption. Or perhaps, neighborhoods directly correlate with alcohol consumption. A similar phenomenon may explain the statistically significant relationship between traveltime = 30-60 minutes relative to traveltime = <15 minutes; when all other predictors are held constant going from traveltime = <15 minutes to traveltime = 30-60 minutes is correlated with average increase in rated alcohol consumption of 0.8842.
	Finally, whether there are extra paid classes within the course subject (paid), whether the student attended nursery school (nursery), a student’s absences, and whether the student’s family is less than or equal to 3 people or greater than 3 members (famsize) all have a statistically significant correlation with alcohol consumption. When all other predictors in the model are held constant, students who pay for extra classes are rated an average of 0.5485 points higher in alcohol consumption. When all other predictors in the model are held constant, students who attended nursery school are rated an average of 0.6269 points lower in alcohol consumption (a negative correlation). When all other predictors in the model are held constant, an increase of 1 in number of absences correlates with an average increase in rated alcohol consumption of 0.0351. And, when all other predictors are held constant, students whose families are less than or equal to 3 members are rated an average of 0.3826 points higher in alcohol consumption than those coming from families greater than three. 
	From this regression, it seems that gender roles, social situations, and family relationships—what one may assume to have the most effect on alcohol consumption—have the strongest correlation with student alcohol consumption. While we cannot assume that these variables cause student alcohol consumption, as correlation does not imply causation, perhaps for male students going out and drinking alcohol is more normalized than female students. There are a multitude of possible reasons for this that we are not able to perfectly explain: perhaps males do not have marginalized identities, metabolize alcohol differently than females, or feel safer going out. Furthermore, familial relationships correlate with student alcohol consumption and also have a multitude of possible reasons: a bad home life could result in drinking to escape problems, less supervision in homes where families are not as close, or even easier access to alcohol. While we do not know the exact reason as to why these variables correlate with student alcohol consumption, there is a clear relationship between them that should not be ignored. Finally, it is important to note that the conclusions that we draw from this data cannot be generalized to other high school or college students as this data represents a sample of students from two secondary schools which is not a representative sample. 

